6.11 • BIAS AND EMBEDDINGS 121
bias ampliﬁcation
representational harm
A t-SNE visualization of the semantic change of 3 words in English using word2vec vectors. The modern sense of each word, and the grey context words, are com-Two-dimensional visualization of semantic change in English using SGNS vectors (see Section 5.8 for the visualization algorithm).puted from the most recent (modern) time-point embedding space. Earlier points are com- from meaning “cheerful” or “frolicsome” to referring to homosexuality.puted from earlier historical embedding spaces. The visualizations show the changes in the 20th centuryword gay from meanings related to “cheerful” or “frolicsome” to referring to homosexuality,broadcast radio its meaning shifted to “transmitting signals”.the development of the modern “transmission” sense of broadcastC, pejoration, as it shifted from meaning “full of awe” to meaning “terrible or appalling”sowing seeds, and the pejoration of the word awful as it shifted from meaning “full of awe” [212].to meaning “terrible or appalling”
that adverbials (e.g.,that use embeddings as part of a search for hiring potential programmers or doctorsactually)have ageneral tendencytoundergo subjectiﬁcation where they shift from objective statements about the world (e.g., “Sorry, the car ismight thus incorrectly downweight documents with women’s names.
It turns out that embeddings don’t just reﬂect the statistics of their input, but actually broken”) to subjective statements (e.g., “I can’t believe he actually did that”, also amplify bias; gendered terms become more gendered in embedding space than indicating surprise/disbelief).they were in the input text statistics (Zhao et al. 2017, Ethayarajh et al. 2019b, Jia
et al. 2020), and biases are more exaggerated than in actual labor employment statis- 5.2.2 Computational linguistic studiestics (Garg et al., 2018). Embeddings also encode the implicit associations that are a property of human There are also a number of recent works analyzing semantic change using computationalreasoning. The Implicit Association Test (Greenwald et al., 1998) measures peo- ple’s associations between concepts (like ‘ﬂowers’ or ‘insects’) and attributes (like200
methods. [ ] use latent semantic analysis to analyze how word meanings broaden ‘pleasantness’ and ‘unpleasantness’) by measuring differences in the latency with and narrow over time. [
which they label words in the various categories.113]use raw co-occurrence vectors toperforma numberof7 Using such methods, people historical case-studies on semantic change, and [in the United States have been shown to associate African-American names with252] perform a similar set of small- scale case-studies using temporal topic models. [unpleasant words (more than European-American names), male names more with87]constructpoint-wise mutual information-based embeddings and found that semantic changes uncovered by theirmathematics and female names with the arts, and old people’s names with unpleas-
ant words (Greenwald et al. 1998, Nosek et al. 2002a, Nosek et al. 2002b). Caliskan method had reasonable agreement with human judgments. [et al. (2017) replicated all these ﬁndings of implicit associations using GloVe vectors129]and [119]use“neural”
word-embedding methods to detect linguistic change points. Finally, [and cosine similarity instead of human latencies. For example African-American257]analyze historical co-occurrences to test whether synonyms tend to change in similar ways.names like ‘Leroy’ and ‘Shaniqua’ had a higher GloVe cosine with unpleasant words while European-American names (‘Brad’, ‘Greg’, ‘Courtney’) had a higher cosine with pleasant words. These problems with embeddings are an example of a repre- sentational harm (Crawford 2017, Blodgett et al. 2020), which is a harm caused by a system demeaning or even ignoring some social groups. Any embedding-aware al- gorithm that made use of word sentiment could thus exacerbate bias against African Americans. Recent research focuses on ways to try to remove these kinds of biases, for ex- ample by developing a transformation of the embedding space that removes gender stereotypes but preserves deﬁnitional gender (Bolukbasi et al. 2016, Zhao et al. 2017)
7 Roughly speaking, if humans associate ‘ﬂowers’ with ‘pleasantness’ and ‘insects’ with ‘unpleasant- ness’, when they are instructed to push a green button for ‘ﬂowers’ (daisy, iris, lilac) and ‘pleasant words’ (love, laughter, pleasure) and a red button for ‘insects’ (ﬂea, spider, mosquito) and ‘unpleasant words’ (abuse, hatred, ugly) they are faster than in an incongruous condition whereCHAPTER 6 • VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
debiasing
or changing the training procedure (Zhao et al., 2018b). However, although these sorts of debiasing may reduce bias in embeddings, they do not eliminate it (Gonen and Goldberg, 2019), and this remains an open problem. Historical embeddings are also being used to measure biases in the past. Garg et al. (2018) used embeddings from historical texts to measure the association be- tween embeddings for occupations and embeddings for names of various ethnici- ties or genders (for example the relative cosine similarity of women’s names versus men’s to occupation words like ‘librarian’ or ‘carpenter’) across the 20th century. They found that the cosines correlate with the empirical historical percentages of women or ethnic groups in those occupations. Historical embeddings also repli- cated old surveys of ethnic stereotypes; the tendency of experimental participants in 1933 to associate adjectives like ‘industrious’ or ‘superstitious’ with, e.g., Chinese ethnicity, correlates with the cosine between Chinese last names and those adjectives using embeddings trained on 1930s text. They also were able to document historical gender biases, such as the fact that embeddings for adjectives related to competence (‘smart’, ‘wise’, ‘thoughtful’, ‘resourceful’) had a higher cosine with male than fe- male words, and showed that this bias has been slowly decreasing since 1960. We return in later chapters to this question about the role of bias in natural language processing.
6.12 Evaluating Vector Models
The most important evaluation metric for vector models is extrinsic evaluation on tasks, i.e., using vectors in an NLP task and seeing whether this improves perfor- mance over some other model. Nonetheless it is useful to have intrinsic evaluations. The most common metric is to test their performance on similarity, computing the correlation between an algorithm’s word similarity scores and word similarity ratings assigned by humans. WordSim-353 (Finkelstein et al., 2002) is a commonly used set of ratings from 0 to 10 for 353 noun pairs; for example (plane, car) had an average score of 5.77. SimLex-999 (Hill et al., 2015) is a more difﬁcult dataset that quantiﬁes similarity (cup, mug) rather than relatedness (cup, coffee), and including both concrete and abstract adjective, noun and verb pairs. The TOEFL dataset is a set of 80 questions, each consisting of a target word with 4 additional word choices; the task is to choose which is the correct synonym, as in the example: Levied is closest in meaning to: imposed, believed, requested, correlated (Landauer and Dumais, 1997). All of these datasets present words without context. Slightly more realistic are intrinsic similarity tasks that include context. The Stanford Contextual Word Similarity (SCWS) dataset (Huang et al., 2012) and the Word-in-Context (WiC) dataset (Pilehvar and Camacho-Collados, 2019) offer richer evaluation scenarios. SCWS gives human judgments on 2,003 pairs of words in their sentential context, while WiC gives target words in two sentential contexts that are either in the same or different senses; see Section 18.5.3. The semantic textual similarity task (Agirre et al. 2012, Agirre et al. 2015) evaluates• SUMMARY 123
have been created for this task, (Mikolov et al. 2013, Mikolov et al. 2013b, Gladkova et al. 2016), covering morphology (city:cities::child:children), lexicographic rela- tions (leg:table::spout::teapot) and encyclopedia relations (Beijing:China::Dublin:Ireland), some drawing from the SemEval-2012 Task 2 dataset of 79 different relations (Jur- gens et al., 2012). All embedding algorithms suffer from inherent variability. For example because of randomness in the initialization and the random negative sampling, algorithms like word2vec may produce different results even from the same dataset, and in- dividual documents in a collection may strongly impact the resulting embeddings (Hellrich and Hahn 2016, Antoniak and Mimno 2018). When embeddings are used to study word associations in particular corpora, therefore, it is best practice to train multiple embeddings with bootstrap sampling over documents and average the re- sults (Antoniak and Mimno, 2018).
6.13 Summary
• In vector semantics, a word is modeled as a vector—a point in high-dimensional space, also called an embedding. In this chapter we focus on static embed- dings, in each each word is mapped to a ﬁxed embedding. • Vector semantic models fall into two classes: sparse and dense. In sparse models each dimension corresponds to a word in the vocabulary V and cells are functions of co-occurrence counts. The term-document matrix has a row for each word (term) in the vocabulary and a column for each document. The word-context or term-term matrix has a row for each (target) word in the vocabulary and a column for each context term in the vocabulary. Two sparse weightings are common: the tf-idf weighting which weights each cell by its term frequency and inverse document frequency, and PPMI (pointwise positive mutual information) most common for for word-context matrices. • Dense vector models have dimensionality 50–1000. Word2vec algorithms like skip-gram are a popular way to compute dense embeddings. Skip-gram trains a logistic regression classiﬁer to compute the probability that two words are ‘likely to occur nearby in text’. This probabilityCHAPTER 6 • VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
mechanical indexing
semantic feature
fundamental aspect of the model. The idea that meaning is related to the distribution of words in context was widespread in linguistic theory of the 1950s, among distributionalists like Zellig Harris, Martin Joos, and J. R. Firth, and semioticians like Thomas Sebeok. As Joos (1950) put it, the linguist’s “meaning” of a morpheme. . . is by deﬁnition the set of conditional probabilities of its occurrence in context with all other morphemes. The idea that the meaning of a word might be modeled as a point in a multi- dimensional semantic space came from psychologists like Charles E. Osgood, who had been studying how people responded to the meaning of words by assigning val- ues along scales like happy/sad or hard/soft. Osgood et al. (1957) proposed that the meaning of a word in general could be modeled as a point in a multidimensional Euclidean space, and that the similarity of meaning between two words could be modeled as the distance between these points in the space. A ﬁnal intellectual source in the 1950s and early 1960s was the ﬁeld then called mechanical indexing, now known as information retrieval. In what became known as the vector space model for information retrieval (Salton 1971, Sparck Jones 1986), researchers demonstrated new ways to deﬁne the meaning of words in terms of vec- tors (Switzer, 1965), and reﬁned methods for word similarity based on measures of statistical association between words like mutual information (Giuliano, 1965) and idf (Sparck Jones, 1972), and showed that the meaning of documents could be represented in the same vector spaces used for words. Some of the philosophical underpinning of the distributional way of thinking came from the late writings of the philosopher Wittgenstein, who was skeptical of the possibility of building a completely formal theory of meaning deﬁnitions for each word, suggesting instead that “the meaning of a word is its use in the language” (Wittgenstein, 1953, PI 43). That is, instead of using some logical language to deﬁne each word, or drawing on denotations or truth values, Wittgenstein’s idea is that we should deﬁne a word by how it is used by people in speaking and understanding in their day-to-day interactions, thus preﬁguring the movement toward embodied and experiential models in linguistics and NLP (Glenberg and Robertson 2000, Lake and Murphy 2020, Bisk et al. 2020, Bender and Koller 2020). More distantly related is the idea of deﬁning words by a vector of discrete fea- tures, which has roots at least as far back as Descartes and Leibniz (Wierzbicka 1992, Wierzbicka 1996). By the middle of the 20th century, beginning with the work of Hjelmslev (Hjelmslev, 1969) (originally 1943) and ﬂeshed out in early models of generative grammar (Katz and Fodor, 1963), the idea arose of representing mean- ing with semantic features, symbols that represent some sort of primitive meaning. For example words like hen, rooster, or chick, have something in common (they all describe chickens) and something different (their age and sex), representable as: hen +female, +chicken, +adult rooster -female, +chicken, +adult chick +chicken, -adult The dimensions used by vector models of meaning to deﬁne words, however, are only abstractly related to this idea of a small ﬁxed number of hand-built dimensions. Nonetheless, there has been some attempt to show that certain dimensions of em- bedding models do contribute some speciﬁc compositional aspectCreated by Xodo PDF Studio. Learn more at xodo.com/pdf-studio
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTESCreated by Xodo PDF Studio. Learn more at xodo.com/pdf-studio
126 CHAPTER 6
ExercisesVector Semantics and Embeddings
荃者所以在鱼，得鱼而忘荃 Nets are for ﬁsh; Once you get the ﬁsh, you can forget the net. 言者所以在意，得意而忘言 Words are for meaning; Once you get the meaning, you can forget the words 庄子(Zhuangzi), Chapter 26
The asphalt that Los Angeles is famous for occurs mainly on its freeways. But in the middle of the city is another patch of asphalt, the La Brea tar pits, and this asphalt preserves millions of fossil bones from the last of the Ice Ages of the Pleis- tocene Epoch. One of these fossils is the Smilodon, or saber-toothed tiger, instantly recognizable by its long canines. Five million years ago or so, a completely different sabre-tooth tiger called Thylacosmilus lived in Argentina and other parts of South Amer- ica. Thylacosmilus was a marsupial whereas Smilodon was a placental mammal, but Thy- lacosmilus had the same long upper canines and, like Smilodon, had a protective bone ﬂange on the lower jaw. The similarity of these two mammals is one of many examples of parallel or convergent evolution, in which particular contexts or environments lead to the evolution of very similar structures in different species (Gould, 1980). The role of context is also important in the similarity of a less biological kind of organism: the word. Words that occur in similar contexts tend to have similar meanings. This link between similarity in how words are distributed and similarity in what they mean is called the distributional hypothesis. The hypothesis was ﬁrst formulated in the 1950s by linguists like Joos (1950), Harris (1954), and Firth (1957), who noticed that words which are synonyms (like oculist and eye-doctor) tended to occur in the same environment (e.g., near words like eye or examined) with the amount of meaning difference between two words “corresponding roughly to the amount of difference in their environments” (Harris, 1954, 157). In this chapter we introduce vector semantics, which instantiates this linguistic hypothesis by learning representations of the meaning of words, called embeddings, directly from their distributions in texts. These representations are used in every nat- ural language processing application that makes use of meaning, and the static em- beddings we introduce here underlie the more powerful dynamic or contextualized embeddings like BERT that we will see in Chapter 10. These word representations are also the ﬁrst example in this book of repre- sentation learning, automatically learning useful representations of the input text. Finding such self-supervised ways to learn representations of the input, instead of creating representations by hand via feature6.1 • LEXICAL SEMANTICS 97
lexical semantics
lemma citation form
wordform synonym
Let’s begin by introducing some basic principles of word meaning. How should we represent the meaning of a word? In the n-gram models of Chapter 3, and in classical NLP applications, our only representation of a word is as a string of letters, or an index in a vocabulary list. This representation is not that different from a tradition in philosophy, perhaps you’ve seen it in introductory logic classes, in which the meaning of words is represented by just spelling the word with small capital letters; representing the meaning of “dog” as DOG, and “cat” as CAT. Representing the meaning of a word by capitalizing it is a pretty unsatisfactory model. You might have seen a joke due originally to semanticist Barbara Partee (Carlson, 1977): Q: What’s the meaning of life? A: LIFE’ Surely we can do better than this! After all, we’ll want a model of word meaning to do all sorts of things for us. It should tell us that some words have similar mean- ings (cat is similar to dog), others are antonyms (cold is the opposite of hot), some have positive connotations (happy) while others have negative connotations (sad). It should represent the fact that the meanings of buy, sell, and pay offer differing perspectives on the same underlying purchasing event (If I buy something from you, you’ve probably sold it to me, and I likely paid you). More generally, a model of word meaning should allow us to draw inferences to address meaning-related tasks like question-answering or dialogue. In this section we summarize some of these desiderata, drawing on results in the linguistic study of word meaning, which is called lexical semantics; we’ll return to and expand on this list in Chapter 18 and Chapter 10. Lemmas and Senses Let’s start by looking at how one word (we’ll choose mouse) might be deﬁned in a dictionary (simpliﬁed from the online dictionary WordNet): mouse (N) 1. any of numerous small rodents... 2. a hand-operated device that controls a cursor... Here the form mouse is the lemma, also called the citation form. The form mouse would also be the lemma for the word mice; dictionaries don’t have separate deﬁnitions for inﬂected forms like mice. Similarly sing is the lemma for sing, sang, sung. In many languages the inﬁnitive form is used as the lemma for the verb, so Spanish dormir “to sleep” is the lemma for duermes “you sleep”. The speciﬁc forms sung or carpets or sing or duermes are called wordforms. As the example above shows, each lemma can have multiple meanings; the lemma mouse can refer to the rodent or the cursor control device. We call each of these aspects of the meaning of mouse a word sense. The fact that lemmas can be polysemous (have multiple senses) can make interpretation difﬁcult (is someone who types “mouse info” into a search engine looking for a pet or a tool?). Chapter 18 will discuss the problem of polysemy, and introduce word sense disambiguation, the task of determining which sense of a word is being used in a particular context. Synonymy One important component of word meaningcouch/sofa vomit/throw up ﬁlbert/hazelnut car/automobile A more formal deﬁnition of synonymy (between words rather than senses) is that two words are synonymous if they are substitutable for one another in any sentence without changing the truth conditions of the sentence, the situations in which the sentence would be true. We often say in this case that the two words have the same propositional meaning. While substitutions between some pairs of words like car / automobile or wa- ter / H2O are truth preserving, the words are still not identical in meaning. Indeed, probably no two words are absolutely identical in meaning. One of the fundamen- tal tenets of semantics, called the principle of contrast (Girard 1718, Breal 1897´ , Clark 1987), states that a difference in linguistic form is always associated with some difference in meaning. For example, the word H2O is used in scientiﬁc contexts and would be inappropriate in a hiking guide—water would be more appropriate— and this genre difference is part of the meaning of the word. In practice, the word syn- onym is therefore used to describe a relationship of approximate or rough synonymy. Word Similarity While words don’t have many synonyms, most words do have lots of similar words. Cat is not a synonym of dog, but cats and dogs are certainly similar words. In moving from synonymy to similarity, it will be useful to shift from talking about relations between word senses (like synonymy) to relations between words (like similarity). Dealing with words avoids having to commit to a particular representation of word senses, which will turn out to simplify our task. The notion of word similarity is very useful in larger semantic tasks. Know- ing how similar two words are can help in computing how similar the meaning of two phrases or sentences are, a very important component of natural language un- derstanding tasks like question answering, paraphrasing, and summarization. One way of getting values for word similarity is to ask humans to judge how similar one word is to another. A number of datasets have resulted from such experiments. For example the SimLex-999 dataset (Hill et al., 2015) gives values on a scale from 0 to 10, like the examples below, which range from near-synonyms (vanish, disappear) to pairs that scarcely seem to have anything in common (hole, agreement): vanish disappear 9.8 belief impression 5.95 muscle bone 3.65 modest ﬂexible 0.98 hole agreement 0.3
Word Relatedness The meaning of two words can be related in ways other than similarity. One such class of connections is called word relatedness (Budanitsky and Hirst, 2006), also traditionally called word association in psychology. Consider the meanings of the words coffee and cup. Coffee is not similar to cup; they share practically no features (coffee is a plant or a beverage, while a cup is a manufactured object with a particular shape). But coffee and cup are clearly related; they are associated by co-participating in an everyday event (the event of drinking coffee out of a cup). Similarly scalpel and surgeon are not similar but are related eventively (a surgeon tends to make use of a scalpel). One common kind of relatedness between words is if they belong to the same semantic ﬁeld. A semantic ﬁeld is a set of words which cover a particular semantic domain and bear structured relations with each other. For example6.1
kitchen, family, bed). Semantic ﬁelds are also related to topic models, like Latent Dirichlet Allocation, LDA, which apply unsupervised learning on large sets of texts to induce sets of associated words from text. Semantic ﬁelds and topic models are very useful tools for discovering topical structure in documents. In Chapter 18 we’ll introduce more relations between senses like hypernymy or IS-A, antonymy (opposites) and meronymy (part-whole relations).
Semantic Frames and Roles Closely related to semantic ﬁelds is the idea of a semantic frame. A semantic frame is a set of words that denote perspectives or participants in a particular type of event. A commercial transaction, for example, is a kind of event in which one entity trades money to another entity in return for some good or service, after which the good changes hands or perhaps the service is performed. This event can be encoded lexically by using verbs like buy (the event from the perspective of the buyer), sell (from the perspective of the seller), pay (focusing on the monetary aspect), or nouns like buyer. Frames have semantic roles (like buyer, seller, goods, money), and words in a sentence can take on these roles. Knowing that buy and sell have this relation makes it possible for a system to know that a sentence like Sam bought the book from Ling could be paraphrased as Ling sold the book to Sam, and that Sam has the role of the buyer in the frame and Ling the seller. Being able to recognize such paraphrases is important for question answering, and can help in shifting perspective for machine translation.
Connotation Finally, words have affective meanings or connotations. The word connotation has different meanings in different ﬁelds, but here we use it to mean the aspects of a word’s meaning that are related to a writer or reader’s emotions, sentiment, opinions, or evaluations. For example some words have positive conno- tations (happy) while others have negative connotations (sad). Even words whose meanings are similar in other ways can vary in connotation; consider the difference in connotations between fake, knockoff, forgery, on the one hand, and copy, replica, reproduction on the other, or innocent (positive connotation) and naive (negative connotation). Some words describe positive evaluation (great, love) and others neg- ative evaluation (terrible, hate). Positive or negative evaluation language is called sentiment, as we saw in Chapter 4, and word sentiment plays a role in important tasks like sentiment analysis, stance detection, and applications of NLP to the lan- guage of politics and consumer reviews. Early work on affective meaning (Osgood et al., 1957) found that words varied along three important dimensions of affective meaning: valence: the pleasantness of the stimulus arousal: the intensity of emotion provoked by the stimulus dominance: the degree of control exerted by the stimulus Thus words like happy or satisﬁed are high on valence, while unhappy or an- noyed are low on valence. Excited is high on arousal, while calm is low on arousal. Controlling is high on dominance, while awed or inﬂuencedCHAPTER 6 • VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
Osgood et al. (1957) noticed that in using these 3 numbers to represent the meaning of a word, the model was representing each word as a point in a three- dimensional space, a vector whose three dimensions corresponded to the word’s rating on the three scales. This revolutionary idea that word meaning could be rep- resented as a point in space (e.g., that part of the meaning of heartbreak can be represented as the point [2.45, 5.65, 3.58]) was the ﬁrst expression of the vector se- mantics models that we introduce next.
6.2 Vector Semantics
vector semantics
embeddings
Vectors semantics is the standard way to represent word meaning in NLP, helping us model many of the aspects of word meaning we saw in the previous section. The roots of the model lie in the 1950s when two big ideas converged: Osgood’s (1957) idea mentioned above to use a point in three-dimensional space to represent the connotation of a word, and the proposal by linguists like Joos (1950), Harris (1954), and Firth (1957) to deﬁne the meaning of a word by its distribution in language use, meaning its neighboring words or grammatical environments. Their idea was that two words that occur in very similar distributions (whose neighboring words are similar) have similar meanings. For example, suppose you didn’t know the meaning of the word ongchoi (a re- cent borrowing from Cantonese) but you see it in the following contexts:
(6.1) Ongchoi is delicious sauteed with garlic. (6.2) Ongchoi is superb over rice. (6.3) ...ongchoi leaves with salty sauces... And suppose that you had seen many of these context words in other contexts: (6.4) ...spinach sauteed with garlic over rice... (6.5) ...chard stems and leaves are delicious... (6.6) ...collard greens and other salty leafy greens The fact that ongchoi occurs with words like rice and garlic and delicious and salty, as do words like spinach, chard, and collard greens might suggest that ongchoi is a leafy green similar to these other leafy greens.1 We can do the same thing computationally by just counting words in the context of ongchoi. The idea of vector semantics is to represent a word as a pointnot good bad to by ’s dislike worst that now are incredibly bad worse a i you than with is
very good incredibly good amazing fantastic wonderful terriﬁc nice good Figure 6.1 A two-dimensional (t-SNE) projection of embeddings for some words and phrases, showing that words with similar meanings are nearby in space. The original 60- dimensional embeddings were trained for sentiment analysis. Simpliﬁed from Li et al. (2015) with colors added for explanation.
The ﬁne-grained model of word similarity of vector semantics offers enormous power to NLP applications. NLP applications like the sentiment classiﬁers of Chap- ter 4 or Chapter 5 depend on the same words appearing in the training and test sets. But by representing words as embeddings, classiﬁers can assign sentiment as long as it sees some words with similar meanings. And as we’ll see, vector semantic models can be learned automatically from text without supervision. In this chapter we’ll introduce the two most commonly used models. In the tf-idf model, an important baseline, the meaning of a word is deﬁned by a simple function of the counts of nearby words. We will see that this method results in very long vectors that are sparse, i.e. mostly zeros (since most words simply never occur in the context of others). We’ll introduce the word2vec model family for construct- ing short, dense vectors that have useful semantic properties. We’ll also introduce the cosine, the standard way to use embeddings to compute semantic similarity, be- tween two words, two sentences, or two documents, an important tool in practical applications like question answering, summarization, or automatic essay grading.
6.3 Words and Vectors “The most important attributes of a vector in 3-space are {Location, Location, Location}” Randall Munroe, https://xkcd.com/2358/
Vector or distributional models of meaning are generally based on a co-occurrence matrix, a way of representing how often words co-occur. We’ll look at two popular matrices: the term-document matrix and the term-term matrix.
6.3.1 Vectors and documents
term-document matrix
vector space model
In a term-document matrix, each row represents a word in the vocabulary and each column represents a document from some collection of documents. Fig. 6.2 shows a small selection from a term-document matrix showing the•
As You Like It Twelfth Night Julius Caesar Henry V battle 1 0 7 13 good 114 80 62 89 fool 36 58 1 4 wit 20 15 2 3 Figure 6.2 The term-document matrix for four words in four Shakespeare plays. Each cell contains the number of times the (row) word occurs in the (column) document.
represented as a count vector, a column in Fig. 6.3. To review some basic linear algebra, a vector is, at heart, just a list or array of numbers. So As You Like It is represented as the list [1,114,36,20] (the ﬁrst column vector in Fig. 6.3) and Julius Caesar is represented as the list [7,62,1,2] (the third column vector). A vector space is a collection of vectors, characterized by their dimension. In the example in Fig. 6.3, the document vectors are of dimension 4, just so they ﬁt on the page; in real term-document matrices, the vectors representing
each document would have dimensionality |V |, the vocabulary size.
The ordering of the numbers in a vector space indicates different meaningful di- mensions on which documents vary. Thus the ﬁrst dimension for both these vectors corresponds to the number of times the word battle occurs, and we can compare each dimension, noting for example that the vectors for As You Like It and Twelfth Night have similar values (1 and 0, respectively) for the ﬁrst dimension.
As You Like It Twelfth Night Julius Caesar Henry V battle 1 0 7 13 good 114 80 62 89 fool 36 58 1 4 wit 20 15 2 3 Figure 6.3 The term-document matrix for four words in four Shakespeare plays. The red boxes show that each document is represented as a column vector of length four.
We can think of the vector for a document as a point in |V |-dimensional space;
thus the documents in Fig. 6.3 are points in 4-dimensional space. Since 4-dimensional spaces are hard to visualize, Fig. 6.4 shows a visualization in two dimensions; we’ve arbitrarily chosen the dimensions corresponding to the words battle and fool.
VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
40 Henry V [4,13]
15
10 Julius Caesar [1,7]
5 As You Like It [36,1] Twelfth Night [58,0]
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 fool Figure 6.4 A spatial visualization of the document vectors for the four Shakespeare play documents, showing just two of the dimensions, corresponding to the6.3
similar will tend to have similar words, and if two documents have similar words their column vectors will tend to be similar. The vectors for the comedies As You Like It [1,114,36,20] and Twelfth Night [0,80,58,15] look a lot more like each other (more fools and wit than battles) than they look like Julius Caesar [7,62,1,2] or Henry V [13,89,4,3]. This is clear with the raw numbers; in the ﬁrst dimension (battle) the comedies have low numbers and the others have high numbers, and we can see it visually in Fig. 6.4; we’ll see very shortly how to quantify this intuition more formally. A real term-document matrix, of course, wouldn’t just have 4 rows and columns,
let alone 2. More generally, the term-document matrix has |V | rows (one for each
word type in the vocabulary) and D columns (one for each document in the collec- tion); as we’ll see, vocabulary sizes are generally in the tens of thousands, and the number of documents can be enormous (think about all the pages on the web). Information retrieval (IR) is the task of ﬁnding the document d from the D documents in some collection that best matches a query q. For IR we’ll therefore also
represent a query by a vector, also of length |V |, and we’ll need a way to compare
two vectors to ﬁnd how similar they are. (Doing IR will also require efﬁcient ways to store and manipulate these vectors by making use of the convenient fact that these vectors are sparse, i.e., mostly zeros). Later in the chapter we’ll introduce some of the components of this vector com- parison process: the tf-idf term weighting, and the cosine similarity metric.
6.3.2 Words as vectors: document dimensions We’ve seen that documents can be represented as vectors in a vector space. But vector semantics can also be used to represent the meaning of words. We do this by associating each word with a word vector— a row vector rather than a column vector, hence with different dimensions, as shown in Fig. 6.5. The four dimensions of the vector for fool, [36,58,1,4], correspond to the four Shakespeare plays. Word counts in the same four dimensions are used to form the vectors for the other 3 words: wit, [20,15,2,3]; battle, [1,0,7,13]; and good [114,80,62,89].
As You Like It Twelfth Night Julius Caesar Henry V battle 1 0 7 13 good 114 80 62 89 fool 36 58 1 4 wit 20 15 2 3 Figure 6.5 The term-document matrix for four words in four Shakespeare plays. The red boxes show that each word is represented as a row vector of length four.
For documents, we saw that similar documents had similar vectors, because sim- ilar documents tend to have similar words. This same principle applies to words: similar words have similar vectors because they tend to occur in similar documents. The term-document matrix thus lets us represent the meaning of a word by the doc- uments it tends to occur in.
6.3.3 Words as vectors: word dimensions An alternative to using the term-document matrix to representthe number of times the row (target) word and the column (context) word co-occur in some context in some training corpus. The context could be the document, in which case the cell represents the number of times the two words appear in the same document. It is most common, however, to use smaller contexts, generally a win- dow around the word, for example of 4 words to the left and 4 words to the right, in which case the cell represents the number of times (in some training corpus) the
column word occurs in such a ±4 word window around the row word. For example
here is one example each of some words in their windows: is traditionally followed by cherry pie, a traditional dessert often mixed, such as strawberry rhubarb pie. Apple pie computer peripherals and personal digital assistants. These devices usually a computer. This includes information available on the internet If we then take every occurrence of each word (say strawberry) and count the context words around it, we get a word-word co-occurrence matrix. Fig. 6.6 shows a simpliﬁed subset of the word-word co-occurrence matrix for these four words com- puted from the Wikipedia corpus (Davies, 2015).
aardvark ... computer data result pie sugar ... cherry 0 ... 2 8 9 442 25 ... strawberry 0 ... 0 0 1 60 19 ... digital 0 ... 1670 1683 85 5 4 ... information 0 ... 3325 3982 378 5 13 ... Figure 6.6 Co-occurrence vectors for four words in the Wikipedia corpus, showing six of the dimensions (hand-picked for pedagogical purposes). The vector for digital is outlined in red. Note that a real vector would have vastly more dimensions and thus be much sparser.
Note in Fig. 6.6 that the two words cherry and strawberry are more similar to each other (both pie and sugar tend to occur in their window) than they are to other words like digital; conversely, digital and information are more similar to each other than, say, to strawberry. Fig. 6.7 shows a spatial visualization.
4000 information 3000 [3982,3325] digital 2000 [1683,1670]
1000
1000 2000 3000 4000
data
Figure 6.7 A spatial visualization of word vectors for digital and information, showing just two of the dimensions, corresponding to the words data and computer.
Note that |V |, the length of the vector, is generally the size of the vocabulary, of-
ten between 10,000 and 50,000 words (using the most frequent words in the training corpus; keeping words after about the most frequent 50,000 or so is generally not helpful). Since most of these numbers are zero these are sparse vector representa- tions; there are efﬁcient algorithms for storing and computing with sparse matrices. Now that we have some intuitions, let’s move on to examine• COSINE FOR MEASURING SIMILARITY 105
6.4 Cosine for measuring similarity
dot product inner product
vector length cosine unit vector
To measure similarity between two target words v and w, we need a metric that takes two vectors (of the same dimensionality, either both with words as dimensions, hence of length |V |, or both with documents as dimensions as documents, of length |metric is theD|) and gives a measure of their similarity. By far the most common similaritycosine of the angle between the vectors. The cosine—like most measures for vector similarity used in NLP—is based on the dot product operator from linear algebra, also called the inner product:
N
dot product(v,w) = v · w =X =1
viwi = v1w1 + v2w2 +...+ vN wN (6.7)
As we will see, most metrics for similarity between vectors are based on the dot product. The dot product acts as a similarity metric because it will tend to be high just when the two vectors have large values in the same dimensions. Alternatively, vectors that have zeros in different dimensions—orthogonal vectors—will have a dot product of 0, representing their strong dissimilarity. This raw dot product, however, has a problem as a similarity metric: it favors long vectors. The vector length is deﬁned as
i
|v| =
uv
N X v2
t i = 1 i
(6.8)
The dot product is higher if a vector is longer, with higher values in each dimension. More frequent words have longer vectors, since they tend to co-occur with more words and have higher co-occurrence values with each of them. The raw dot product thus will be higher for frequent words. But this is a problem; we’d like a similarity metric that tells us how similar two words are regardless of their frequency. We modify the dot product to normalize for the vector length by dividing the dot product by the lengths of each of the two vectors. This normalized dot product turns out to be the same as the cosine of the angle between the two vectors, following from the deﬁnition of the dot product between two vectors a and b:
a · b = |a||b| cos θ a · b = cos θ |a||b|
(6.9)
The cosine similarity metric between two vectors v and w thus can be computed as:
cosine(v,w) = v · w = |v||w|
N
X =1
uv
N X v2
t i = 1 i
i
viwi
uv
(6.10) N
tX =1
w2 i
For some applications we pre-normalize each vector, by dividing it by its length, creating a unit vector of length 1. Thus we could compute a unit vector from a by
dividing it by |a|. For unit vectors, the dot product is the sameCHAPTER 6 • VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
The cosine value ranges from 1 for vectors pointing in the same direction, through 0 for orthogonal vectors, to -1 for vectors pointing in opposite directions. But since raw frequency values are non-negative, the cosine for these vectors ranges from 0–1. Let’s see how the cosine computes which of the words cherry or digital is closer in meaning to information, just using raw counts from the following shortened table:
cherry digital information
pie data computer 442 8 2 5 1683 1670 5 3982 3325
cos(cherry, information) =
442 ∗ 5 + 8 ∗√3982 + 2 ∗ 3325 √4422 + 82 + 22 52 + 39822 + 33252
= .017
∗ 39822√+ 1670 ∗ 3325 = .996 cos(digital, information) = √52 +5 ∗16835 + 21683+ 1670 52 + 39822 + 33252 The model decides that information is way closer to digital than it is to cherry, a result that seems sensible. Fig. 6.8 shows a visualization.
500 cherry
digital information
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 Dimension 2: ‘computer’
Figure 6.8 A (rough) graphical demonstration of cosine similarity, showing vectors for three words (cherry, digital, and information) in the two dimensional space deﬁned by counts of the words computer and pie nearby. Note that the angle between digital and information is smaller than the angle between cherry and information. When two vectors are more similar, the cosine is larger but the angle is smaller; the cosine has its maximum (1) when the angle between two vectors is smallest (0◦); the cosine of all other angles is less than 1.
6.5 TF-IDF: Weighing terms in the vector
The co-occurrence matrices above represent each cell by frequencies, either of words with documents (Fig. 6.5), or words with other words (Fig. 6.6). But raw frequency is not the best measure of association between words. Raw frequency is very skewed and not very discriminative. If we want to know what kinds of contexts are shared by cherry and strawberry but not by digital and information, we’re not going to get good discrimination from words like the, it, or they, which occur frequently with all sorts of words and aren’t informative about any particular• TF-IDF: WEIGHING TERMS IN THE VECTOR 107
term frequency
document frequency
idf
that are too frequent—ubiquitous, like the or good— are unimportant. How can we balance these two conﬂicting constraints? There are two common solutions to this problem: in this section we’ll describe the tf-idf algorithm, usually used when the dimensions are documents. In the next we introduce the PPMI algorithm (usually used when the dimensions are words). The tf-idf algorithm (the ‘-’ here is a hyphen, not a minus sign) is the product of two terms, each term capturing one of these two intuitions: The ﬁrst is the term frequency (Luhn, 1957): the frequency of the word t in the document d. We can just use the raw count as the term frequency:
tft, d = count(t, d) (6.11)
More commonly we squash the raw frequency a bit, by using the log10 of the fre- quency instead. The intuition is that a word appearing 100 times in a document doesn’t make that word 100 times more likely to be relevant to the meaning of the document. Because we can’t take the log of 0, we normally add 1 to the count:2
tft, d = log10(count(t, d)+ 1) (6.12)
If we use log weighting, terms which occur 0 times in a document would have tf = log10(1) = 0, 10 times in a document tf = log10(11) = 1.4, 100 times tf = log10(101) = 2.004, 1000 times tf = 3.00044, and so on. The second factor in tf-idf is used to give a higher weight to words that occur only in a few documents. Terms that are limited to a few documents are useful for discriminating those documents from the rest of the collection; terms that occur frequently across the entire collection aren’t as helpful. The document frequency dft of a term t is the number of documents it occurs in. Document frequency is not the same as the collection frequency of a term, which is the total number of times the word appears in the whole collection in any document. Consider in the collection of Shakespeare’s 37 plays the two words Romeo and action. The words have identical collection frequencies (they both occur 113 times in all the plays) but very different document frequencies, since Romeo only occurs in a single play. If our goal is to ﬁnd documents about the romantic tribulations of Romeo, the word Romeo should be highly weighted, but not action:
Romeo action
Collection Frequency 113 113
Document Frequency 1 31
We emphasize discriminative words like Romeo via the inverse document fre- quency or idf term weight (Sparck Jones, 1972). The idf is deﬁned using the frac- tion N/dft , where N is the total number of documents in the collection, and dft is the number of documents in which term t occurs. The fewer documents in which a term occurs, the higher this weight. The lowest weight of 1 is assigned to terms that occur in all the documents. It’s usually clear what counts as a document: in Shake- speare we would use a play; when processing a collection of encyclopedia articles like Wikipedia, the document is a Wikipedia page; in processing newspaper articles, the document is a single article. Occasionally your corpusCHAPTER 6
tf-idf
• VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
Because of the large number of documents in many collections, this measure too is usually squashed with a log function. The resulting deﬁnition for inverse document frequency (idf) is thus
N idft = log10  dft  (6.13)
Here are some idf values for some words in the Shakespeare corpus, ranging from extremely informative words which occur in only one play like Romeo, to those that occur in a few like salad or Falstaff, to those which are very common like fool or so common as to be completely non-discriminative since they occur in all 37 plays like good or sweet.3
Word df idf Romeo 1 1.57 salad 2 1.27 Falstaff 4 0.967 forest 12 0.489 battle 21 0.246 wit 34 0.037 fool 36 0.012 good 37 0 sweet 37 0
The tf-idf weighted value wt, d for word t in document d thus combines term frequency tft, d (deﬁned either by Eq. 6.11 or by Eq. 6.12) with idf from Eq. 6.13:
wt, d = tft, d × idft
(6.14)
Fig. 6.9 applies tf-idf weighting to the Shakespeare term-document matrix in Fig. 6.2, using the tf equation Eq. 6.12. Note that the tf-idf values for the dimension corre- sponding to the word good have now all become 0; since this word appears in every document, the tf-idf algorithm leads it to be ignored. Similarly, the word fool, which appears in 36 out of the 37 plays, has a much lower weight.
As You Like It Twelfth Night Julius Caesar Henry V battle 0.074 0 0.22 0.28 good 0 0 0 0 fool 0.019 0.021 0.0036 0.0083 wit 0.049 0.044 0.018 0.022 Figure 6.9 A tf-idf weighted term-document matrix for four words in four Shakespeare plays, using the counts in Fig. 6.2. For example the 0.049 value for wit in As You Like It is the product of tf = log10(20 + 1) = 1.322 and idf = .037. Note that the idf weighting has eliminated the importance of the ubiquitous word good and vastly reduced the impact of the almost-ubiquitous word fool.
The tf-idf weighting is the way for weighting co-occurrence matrices in infor- mation retrieval, but also plays a role in many other aspects of natural language processing. It’s also a great baseline, the simple thing to try ﬁrst109
pointwise mutual information
PPMI
An alternative weighting function to tf-idf, PPMI (positive pointwise mutual infor- mation), is used for term-term-matrices, when the vector dimensions correspond to words rather than documents. PPMI draws on the intuition that the best way to weigh the association between two words is to ask how much more the two words co-occur in our corpus than we would have a priori expected them to appear by chance. Pointwise mutual information (Fano, 1961)4 is one of the most important con- cepts in NLP. It is a measure of how often two events x and y occur, compared with what we would expect if they were independent:
P(x, y) I(x, y) = log2 P(x)P(y) The pointwise mutual information between a target word w and a context word c (Church and Hanks 1989, Church and Hanks 1990) is then deﬁned as:
(6.16)
P(w, c) PMI(w, c) = log2 P(w)P(c) (6.17) The numerator tells us how often we observed the two words together (assuming we compute probability by using the MLE). The denominator tells us how often we would expect the two words to co-occur assuming they each occurred indepen- dently; recall that the probability of two independent events both occurring is just the product of the probabilities of the two events. Thus, the ratio gives us an esti- mate of how much more the two words co-occur than we expect by chance. PMI is a useful tool whenever we need to ﬁnd words that are strongly associated. PMI values range from negative to positive inﬁnity. But negative PMI values (which imply things are co-occurring less often than we would expect by chance) tend to be unreliable unless our corpora are enormous. To distinguish whether two words whose individual probability is each 10−6 occur together less often than chance, we would need to be certain that the probability of the two occurring to- gether is signiﬁcantly different than 10−12, and this kind of granularity would require an enormous corpus. Furthermore it’s not clear whether it’s even possible to evalu- ate such scores of ‘unrelatedness’ with human judgments. For this reason it is more common to use Positive PMI (called PPMI) which replaces all negative PMI values with zero (Church and Hanks 1989, Dagan et al. 1993, Niwa and Nitta 1994)5:
P(w, c) PPMI(w, c) = max(log2 P(w)P(c) More formally, let’s assume we have a co-occurrence matrix F with W rows (words) and C columns (contexts), where fi j gives the number ofCHAPTER 6 • VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
context c j . This can be turned into a PPMI matrix where ppmii j gives the PPMI value of word wi with context c j as follows:
PC 1 fi j fi j PW 1 fi j fi j
pi j = fi j pi∗ =
j=
p∗ j =
i= (6.19)
PW 1 PC 1 fi j PW 1 PC PW 1 PC
i= j= i= j=1 i= j=1
pi j PPMIi j = max(log2
, 0) (6.20)
pi∗ p∗ j
Let’s see some PPMI calculations. We’ll use Fig. 6.10, which repeats Fig. 6.6 plus all the count marginals, and let’s pretend for ease of calculation that these are the only words/contexts that matter.
computer data result pie sugar count(w) cherry 2 8 9 442 25 486 strawberry 0 0 1 60 19 80 digital 1670 1683 85 5 4 3447 information 3325 3982 378 5 13 7703
count(context) 4997 5673 473 512 61 11716 Figure 6.10 Co-occurrence counts for four words in 5 contexts in the Wikipedia corpus, together with the marginals, pretending for the purpose of this calculation that no other word- s/contexts matter.
Thus for example we could compute PPMI(w=information,c=data), assuming we pretended that Fig. 6.6 encompassed all the relevant word contexts/dimensions, as follows: 3982 11716 7703 11716 5673 11716 ppmi(information,data) = log 2(.3399/(.6575
P(w=information,c=data) = = .3399
P(w=information) = = .6575
P(c=data) = = .4842
∗.4842)) = .0944
Fig. 6.11 shows the joint probabilities computed from the counts in Fig. 6.10, and Fig. 6.12 shows the PPMI values. Not surprisingly, cherry and strawberry are highly associated with both pie and sugar, and data is mildly associated with information.
p(w,context) p(w) computer data result pie sugar p(w) cherry 0.0002 0.0007 0.0008 0.0377 0.0021 0.0415 strawberry 0.0000 0.0000 0.0001 0.0051 0.0016 0.0068 digital 0.1425 0.1436 0.0073 0.0004 0.0003 0.2942 information 0.2838 0.3399 0.0323 0.0004 0.0011 0.6575
p(context) 0.4265 0.4842 0.0404 0.0437 0.0052 Figure 6.11 Replacing the counts in Fig. 6.6 with joint probabilities, showing the marginals around the outside.
PMI has the problem of being biased toward infrequent eventscomputer data result pie sugar cherry 0 0 0 4.38 3.30 strawberry 0 0 0 4.10 5.51 digital 0.18 0.01 0 0 0 information 0.02 0.09 0.28 0 0 Figure 6.12 The PPMI matrix showing the association between words and context words, computed from the counts in Fig. 6.11. Note that most of the 0 PPMI values are ones that had a negative PMI; for example PMI(cherry,computer) = -6.7, meaning that cherry and computer co-occur on Wikipedia less often than we would expect by chance, and with PPMI we replace negative values by zero.
events is to slightly change the computation for P(c), using a different function Pα(c) that raises the probability of the context word to the power of α :
P(w, c) PPMIα(w, c) = max(log2 P(w)Pα(c) count(c)α P c count(c)α (6.22) Levy et al. (2015) found that a setting ofα( ) = Pc α = 0.75 improved performance of embeddings on a wide range of tasks (drawing on a similar weighting used for skip- grams described below in Eq. 6.32). This works because raising the count to α = 0.75 increases the probability assigned to rare contexts, and hence lowers their PMI (Pα(c) > P(c) when c is rare). Another possible solution is Laplace smoothing: Before computing PMI, a small constant k (values of 0.1-3 are common) is added to each of the counts, shrinking (discounting) all the non-zero values. The larger the k, the more the non-zero counts are discounted.
, 0) (6.21)
6.7 Applications of the tf-idf or PPMI vector models
In summary, the vector semantics model we’ve described so far represents a target word as a vector with dimensions corresponding either to to the documents in a large collection (the term-document matrix) or to the counts of words in some neighboring window (the term-term matrix). The values in each dimension are counts, weighted by tf-idf (for term-document matrices) or PPMI (for term-term matrices), and the vectors are sparse (since most values are zero). The model computes the similarity between two words x and y by taking the cosine of their tf-idf or PPMI vectors; high cosine, high similarity. This entire model is sometimes referred to as the tf-idf model or the PPMI model, after the weighting function. The tf-idf model of meaning is often used for document functions like deciding if two documents are similar. We represent a document by taking the vectors of centroid all the words in the document, and computing the centroidCHAPTER 6 • VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
Given two documents, we can then compute their document vectors d1 and d2, and estimate the similarity between the two documents by cos(d1, d2). Document sim- ilarity is also useful for all sorts of applications; information retrieval, plagiarism detection, news recommender systems, and even for digital humanities tasks like comparing different versions of a text to see which are similar to each other. Either the PPMI model or the tf-idf model can be used to compute word simi- larity, for tasks like ﬁnding word paraphrases, tracking changes in word meaning, or automatically discovering meanings of words in different corpora. For example, we can ﬁnd the 10 most similar words to any target word w by computing the cosines
between w and each of the V − 1 other words, sorting, and looking at the top 10. 6.8 Word2vec
skip-gram SGNS word2vec
static embeddings
In the previous sections we saw how to represent a word as a sparse, long vector with dimensions corresponding to words in the vocabulary or documents in a collection. We now introduce a more powerful word representation: embeddings, short dense vectors. Unlike the vectors we’ve seen so far, embeddings are short, with number of dimensions d ranging from 50-1000, rather than the much larger vocabulary size
|V | or number of documents D we’ve seen. These d dimensions don’t have a clear
interpretation. And the vectors are dense: instead of vector entries being sparse, mostly-zero counts or functions of counts, the values will be real-valued numbers that can be negative. It turns out that dense vectors work better in every NLP task than sparse vectors. While we don’t completely understand all the reasons for this, we have some intu- itions. Representing words as 300-dimensional dense vectors requires our classiﬁers to learn far fewer weights than if we represented words as 50,000-dimensional vec- tors, and the smaller parameter space possibly helps with generalization and avoid- ing overﬁtting. Dense vectors may also do a better job of capturing synonymy. For example, in a sparse vector representation, dimensions for synonyms like car and automobile dimension are distinct and unrelated; sparse vectors may thus fail to capture the similarity between a word with car as a neighbor and a word with automobile as a neighbor. In this section we introduce one method for computing embeddings: skip-gram with negative sampling, sometimes called SGNS. The skip-gram algorithm is one of two algorithms in a software package called word2vec, and so sometimes the al- gorithm is loosely referred to as word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013, Mikolov et al. 2013a). The word2vec methods are fast, efﬁcient to train, and easily available online with code and pretrained embeddings. Word2vec embeddings are static embeddings, meaning that the method learns one ﬁxed embedding for each word in the vocabu- lary. In Chapter 10 we’ll introduce methods for learning dynamic contextual em- beddings like the popular BERT or ELMO representations, in which the vector for each word is different in different contexts. The intuition of word2vec is that instead of counting how often each word w oc- curs near, say, apricot, we’ll instead train a classiﬁer on a binary• WORD2VEC 113
self-supervision
up near apricot?” This method, often called self-supervision, avoids the need for any sort of hand-labeled supervision signal. This idea was ﬁrst proposed in the task of neural language modeling, when Bengio et al. (2003) and Collobert et al. (2011) showed that a neural language model (a neural network that learned to predict the next word from prior words) could just use the next word in running text as its supervision signal, and could be used to learn an embedding representation for each word as part of doing this prediction task. We’ll see how to do neural networks in the next chapter, but word2vec is a much simpler model than the neural network language model, in two ways. First, word2vec simpliﬁes the task (making it binary classiﬁcation instead of word pre- diction). Second, word2vec simpliﬁes the architecture (training a logistic regression classiﬁer instead of a multi-layer neural network with hidden layers that demand more sophisticated training algorithms). The intuition of skip-gram is: 1. Treat the target word and a neighboring context word as positive examples. 2. Randomly sample other words in the lexicon to get negative samples. 3. Use logistic regression to train a classiﬁer to distinguish those two cases. 4. Use the learned weights as the embeddings.
6.8.1 The classiﬁer Let’s start by thinking about the classiﬁcation task, and then turn to how to train. Imagine a sentence like the following, with a target word apricot, and assume we’re using a window of ±2 context words: ... lemon, a [tablespoon of apricot jam, a] pinch ... c1 c2 w c3 c4 Our goal is to train a classiﬁer such that, given a tuple (w, c) of a target word w paired with a candidate context word c (for example (apricot, jam), or perhaps (apricot, aardvark)) it will return the probability that c is a real context word (true for jam, false for aardvark):
P(+|w, c) (6.24) The probability that word c is not a real context word for w is just 1 minus Eq. 6.24:
P(−|w, c) = 1 − P(+|w, c) (6.25) How does the classiﬁer compute the probability P? The intuition of the skip-
gram model is to base this probability on embedding similarity: a word is likely to occur near the target if its embedding is similar to the target embedding. To compute similarity between these dense embeddings, we rely on the intuition that two vectors are similar if they have a high dot product (after all, cosine is just a normalized dot product). In other words:
Similarity(w, c) ≈ c · w (6.26) The dot product(since the elements in word2vec embeddings can be negative, the dot product can bec · w is not a probability, it’s just a number ranging from −∞ to ∞
negative). To turn the dot product into a probability, we’ll useWe model the probability that word c is a real context word for target word w as:
1
P(+|w, c) = σ(c · w) = 1 + exp (−c · w)
(6.28)
The sigmoid function returns a number between 0 and 1, but to make it a probability we’ll also need the total probability of the two possible events (c is a context word, and c isn’t a context word) to sum to 1. We thus estimate the probability that word c is not a real context word for w as:
P(−|w, c) = 1 − P(+|w, c) = σ(−c · w) = 1
1 + exp (c · w) Equation 6.28 gives us the probability for one word, but there are many context words in the window. Skip-gram makes the simplifying assumption that all context words are independent, allowing us to just multiply their probabilities:
(6.29)
L
P(+|w, c1:L) = Y=1 σ(−ci · w) (6.30) L
i
log P(+|w, c1:L) = X
log σ(−ci · w)
(6.31) i=1 In summary, skip-gram trains a probabilistic classiﬁer that, given a test target word w and its context window of L words c1:L, assigns a probability based on how similar this context window is to the target word. The probability is based on applying the logistic (sigmoid) function to the dot product of the embeddings of the target word with each context word. To compute this probability, we just need embeddings for each target word and context word in the vocabulary.
aardvark 1..d 1
apricot
& =
W target words
… …
|V|+1|V|
zebra aardvark apricot C context & noise
… …
zebra 2V words The embeddings learned by the skipgram model. The algorithm stores two
Figure 6.13 embeddings for each word, the target embedding (sometimes called the input embedding) and the context embedding (sometimes called the output embedding). The parameter θ that the algorithm learns is thus a matrix of 2|V | vectors, each of dimension d, formed by concate- nating two matrices, the target embeddings W and the context+noise embeddings C.
Fig. 6.13 shows• WORD2VEC 115
word considered as context. Thus the parameters we need to learn are two matrices W and C, each containing an embedding for every one of the |V | words in the vo- cabulary V .6 Let’s now turn to learning these embeddings (which is the real goal of training this classiﬁer in the ﬁrst place).
6.8.2 Learning skip-gram embeddings
Skip-gram learns embeddings by starting with random embedding vectors and then iteratively shifting the embedding of each word w to be more like the embeddings of words that occur nearby in texts, and less like the embeddings of words that don’t occur nearby. Let’s start by considering a single piece of training data: ... lemon, a [tablespoon of apricot jam, a] pinch ... c1 c2 w c3 c4 This example has a target word w (apricot), and 4 context words in the L = ±2 window, resulting in 4 positive training instances (on the left below): positive examples + negative examples - w cpos w cneg w cneg apricot tablespoon apricot aardvark apricot seven apricot of apricot my apricot forever apricot jam apricot where apricot dear apricot a apricot coaxial apricot if For training a binary classiﬁer we also need negative examples. In fact skip- gram with negative sampling (SGNS) uses more negative examples than positive examples (with the ratio between them set by a parameter k). So for each of these (w, cpos) training instances we’ll create k negative samples, each consisting of the target w plus a ‘noise word’ cneg. A noise word is a random word from the lexicon, constrained not to be the target word w. The right above shows the setting where k = 2, so we’ll have 2 negative examples in the negative training set − for each positive example w, cpos. The noise words are chosen according to their weighted unigram frequency pα(w), where α is a weight. If we were sampling according to unweighted fre- quency p(w), it would mean that with unigram probability p(“the”) we would choose the word the as a noise word, with unigram probability p(“aardvark”) we would choose aardvark, and so on. But in practice it is common to set α = .75, i.e. use the
3 weighting p 4 (w):
count(w)α Setting α = Pα(w) = Pw0 count(w0)α (6.32) higher probability: for rare words, Pα(w) > P(w). To illustrate this intuition, it might help to work out the probabilities for an example with two events, P(a) = .99
75 gives better performance because it gives rare noise words slightly and P(b) = .01:
.
Pα(a) = Pα(b) =
.99.75 .99.75 +.01.75 .01.75 .99.75 +.01.75
= .97 = .03
(6.33)
6 In principle the target matrix and the context matrix could use differentGiven the set of positive and negative training instances, and an initial set of embed- dings, the goal of the learning algorithm is to adjust those embeddings to • Maximize the similarity of the target word, context word pairs (w, cpos) drawn from the positive examples • Minimize the similarity of the (w, cneg) pairs from the negative examples. If we consider one word/context pair (w, cpos) with its k noise words cneg1 ...cnegk , we can express these two goals as the following loss function L to be minimized
(hence the −); here the ﬁrst term expresses that we want the classiﬁer to assign the
real context word cpos a high probability of being a neighbor, and the second term expresses that we want to assign each of the noise words cnegi a high probability of being a non-neighbor, all multiplied because we assume independence:
= − log "P(+|w, P(−|w, cnegi )# = −"log log P(−|w, cnegi )# = −"log = −"log
k
cpos)Y P(+|w, cpos)+X
LCE i=1 k
i=1 k
P(+|w, cpos)+X )#
1 − P(+|w, cneg (−cnegi · w)#
log i=1 k
i
σ(cpos · w)+X
log σ (6.34)
i=1
That is, we want to maximize the dot product of the word with the actual context words, and minimize the dot products of the word with the k negative sampled non- neighbor words. We minimize this loss function using stochastic gradient descent. Fig. 6.14 shows the intuition of one step of learning.
aardvark move apricot and jam closer, apricot w increasing cpos z w
!
W “…apricot jam…” zebra aardvark jam cpos C k=2 matrix cneg1 Tolstoy cneg2 zebra
move apricot and matrix apart decreasing cneg1 z w
move apricot and Tolstoy apart decreasing cneg2 z w
Figure 6.14 Intuition of one step of gradient descent. The skip-gram model tries to shift embeddings so the target embeddings (here for apricot) are closer to (have a higher dot prod- uct with) context embeddings for nearby words (here jam) and further from (lower dot product with) context embeddings for noise words that don’t occur nearby (here Tolstoy and matrix).
To get the gradient, we need to take the derivative of Eq. 6.34 with respect to the different embeddings. It turns out the derivatives are the following• WORD2VEC 117
target embedding context embedding
fasttext
proof as an exercise at the end of the chapter):
∂ LCE ∂ cpos ∂ LCE ∂ cneg ∂ LCE ∂ w
= [σ(cpos · w) − 1]w = [σ(cneg · w)]w = [σ(cpos · w) − 1]cpos +
(6.35)
(6.36)
k X[σ(cnegi · w)]cnegi
i = 1
(6.37)
The update equations going from time step t to t + 1 in stochastic gradient descent are thus:
ct+1 = pos −η [σ(ctpos · w) − 1]w −η [σ(ctneg · w)]w
pos ct
ct+1 = ct
neg neg
k wt+1 = wt −η [σ(cpos · wt ) − 1]cpos +X[σ(cnegi · wt )]cnegi
i = 1
(6.38) (6.39) (6.40)
Just as in logistic regression, then, the learning algorithm starts with randomly ini- tialized W and C matrices, and then walks through the training6.10 • SEMANTIC PROPERTIES OF EMBEDDINGS 119
For example Levy and Goldberg (2014a) showed that using skip-gram with a
window of ±2, the most similar words to the word Hogwarts (from the Harry Potter
series) were names of other ﬁctional schools: Sunnydale (from Buffy the Vampire Slayer) or Evernight (from a vampire series). With a window of ±5, the most similar words to Hogwarts were other words topically related to the Harry Potter series: Dumbledore, Malfoy, and half-blood. It’s also often useful to distinguish two kinds of similarity or association between words (Schutze and Pedersen, 1993)¨ . Two words have ﬁrst-order co-occurrence (sometimes called syntagmatic association) if they are typically nearby each other. Thus wrote is a ﬁrst-order associate of book or poem. Two words have second-order co-occurrence (sometimes called paradigmatic association) if they have similar neighbors. Thus wrote is a second-order associate of words like said or remarked.
Analogy/Relational Similarity: Another semantic property of embeddings is their ability to capture relational meanings. In an important early vector space model of cognition, Rumelhart and Abrahamson (1973) proposed the parallelogram model for solving simple analogy problems of the form a is to b as a* is to what?. In such problems, a system given a problem like apple:tree::grape:?, i.e., apple is to tree as grape is to , and must ﬁll in the word vine. In the parallelogram model, illus-
#       » #   »
trated in Fig. 6.15, the vector from the word apple to the word tree (= apple − tree)
#        »
is added to the vector for grape (grape); the nearest word to that point is returned.
apple
vine grape Figure 6.15 The parallelogram model for analogy problems (Rumelhart and Abrahamson, 1973): the location of vine can be found by subtracting tree from apple and adding #       » In early work with sparse embeddings, scholars showed that sparse vector mod- els of meaning could solve such analogy problems (Turney and Littman, 2005), but the parallelogram method received more modern attention because of its success with word2vec or GloVe vectors (Mikolov et al. 2013b, Levy and Goldberg 2014b,
#     » #     »
Pennington et al. 2014). For example, the result of the expression (king) − man +
#     »
#            » #         » #      » #           »
woman is a vector close to queen. Similarly, Paris − France + Italy) results in a
vector that is close to Rome. The embedding model thus seems to be extracting rep-#         » resentations of relations like MALE-FEMALE, or CAPITAL-CITY-OF, or even COM- PARATIVE/SUPERLATIVE, as shown in Fig. 6.16 from GloVe. For a a:b::a*:b* problem, meaning the algorithm is given a, b, and a* and must ﬁnd b*, the parallelogram method is thus:
bˆ
∗ = argmax distance(x, a∗ − a + b)
(6.41) x
with the distance function deﬁned either as cosine or as EuclideanCHAPTER 6 • VECTOR SEMANTICS AND EMBEDDINGS
(a) (b)
#     » #     » #            »
sions. (a) (king) − man + woman is close to #        » morphology (Pennington et al., 2014).
Figure 6.16
Relational properties of the GloVe vector space, shown by projecting vectors onto two dimen- queen. (b) offsets seem to capture comparative and superlative
potato:x returns potato or potatoes instead of brown), so these must be explicitly excluded. Furthermore while embedding spaces perform well if the task involves frequent words, small distances, and certain relations (like relating countries with their capitals or verbs/nouns with their inﬂected forms), the parallelogram method with embeddings doesn’t work as well for other relations (Linzen 2016, Gladkova et al. 2016, Ethayarajh et al. 2019a), and indeed Peterson et al. (2020) argue that the parallelogram method is in general too simple to model the human cognitive process of forming analogies of this kind.
6.10.1 Embeddings and Historical Semantics
Embeddings can also be a useful tool for studying how meaning changes over time, by computing multiple embedding spaces, each from texts written in a particular time period. For example Fig. 6.17 shows a visualization of changes in meaning in English words over the last two centuries, computed by building separate embedding spaces for each decade from historical corpora like Google N-grams (Lin et al., 2012b) and the Corpus of Historical American English (Davies, 2012).
6.11 Bias and Embeddings
allocational harm
In addition to their ability to learn word meaning from text, embeddings, alas, also reproduce the implicit biases and stereotypes that were latent in the text. As the prior section just showed, embeddings can roughly model relational similar- ity: ‘queen’ as the closest word to ‘king’ - ‘man’ + ‘woman’ implies the analogy man:woman::king:queen. But these same embedding analogies also exhibit gender stereotypes. For example Bolukbasi et al. (2016) ﬁnd that the closest occupation to ‘man’ - ‘computer programmer’ + ‘woman’ in word2vec embeddings trained on news text is ‘homemaker’, and that the embeddings similarly suggest the analogy ‘father’ is to ‘doctor’ as ‘mother’ is to ‘nurse’. This could result